Next we're gonna look at further customization
and more advanced customization through the use
of something called Z Shell.
Now, before you were running bash,
and you can tell partly by its plain look, but also
the title bar of the terminal says bash.
And Z Shell is a different type of shell programme.
You have bash, fish is one of them that we saw earlier.
And Z Shell just gives us a bunch of extra features,
and I was introduced to it a few years ago,
and I really like it, I really like some of the plugins
that are available and the ecosystem that's out there.
And I know many other developers are using it as well,
so I wanted to introduce it in these videos.
Now, the Z Shell page, don't worry, you don't have to
go here, but it's not particularly inviting,
but I just wanted to bring it in for the context.
Really, what we're interested in is this
kind of layer on top.
There's a framework on top of Z Shell
to help us configure it called Oh My Zsh.
I'm not sure how to pronounce Zsh, Zsh?
It's pretty straightforward to instal.
I'll come onto that in a moment.
And what it'll give us is themes,
a way to add plugins really easily,
and a bunch of stuff that just makes,
certainly for me, makes my terminal experience
much more satisfying, so I wanna show you that as well.
So the first thing we need to do
is instal Z Shell, but we're also gonna instal
something called Z Shell completions,
which we'll use to help us navigate around,
and we're gonna use brew to do the installation of this.
If you haven't got brew, go back to the
second series of videos and grab brew.
So Z Shell is just, brew instal zsh
and then zsh-completions.
I believe that's right, yup.
So you run those two commands,
it should go ahead and prompt to you for disc space
and so on, you say yes and instal those two.
Now, I've already done that.
Now you can check that's been installed
by just typing zsh Enter, you might get
a slightly different prompt, but it should just run.
I'm just gonna back out of that,
and to back out of the terminal is Ctrl + D.
That will always exit out of a shell.
The next thing we wanna do, or I wanna do,
instal Oh My Zsh, so I'm just gonna scroll down,
prerequisites are the operating system,
that works very well on macOS.
Zsh which we've just installed,
we can check again, zsh --version.
So we have that, great.
Curl or wget, if you find you don't have curl
or wget installed, we do a quick check with this
and wget --version.
You can go ahead and do a brew instal curl,
it'll give you curl.
And then we're gonna do a copy and paste drop here.
So I'm gonna copy and paste this.
A note about security here.
This is basically grabbing a script from online somewhere
on the Internet, and running it on your local machine,
you should have a mind on security.
Now, I've already installed this, I trust this script.
I can also, honestly, I haven't looked at the contents
in detail, certainly recently, but there's nothing stopping
the owner of this repo putting something malicious
in this script, it's kind of like putting a script tag
on your web page to anyone's web server
and hoping they give you something that's nice,
a decent advert instead of one that tracks
every keyboard press on the page.
And you can see it's also prompting me for my password,
which I'm gonna give it because
it needs to do the installation.
But just be wary of doing that,
the same way as you would be if you were installing
a third party piece of code or programme
on your computer or on your phone or anything like that.
So just be wary when you're asked to do
this kind of copy and paste shell,
it's basically saying run the contents of this script
in my shell, now I can go ahead and look at this URL,
put it in the browser if I want to.
It isn't particularly intuitive, what I'm reading,
I do know I've run it before and it is safe.
Caveats aside, we have changed shell.
So it says Oh My Zsh is now installed,
please look over .zshrc or Z Shell RC to select plugins,
and we'll look at that in a moment.
Get some stickers and so on.
You can see the prompt's slightly different now,
so we bring up to the top and just do an ls -ltr.
You can see things are very slightly different
to what we saw before.
So we've got bold and colours going on for directories.
We've got non-bold text for regular files.
If I go into, I think it's Documents,
and I'm hitting Tab for completion.
And I just hit Tab again there and it gives me
all of the arguments to ls, which is pretty useful.
We saw this with fish as well.
So I can do the same thing, we go into jsonbin, oh.
There, sorry, typo.
And you can see something going on here as well,
so let me just clear the prompt.
You can see the prompt has changed slightly.
So we can see it's a git repo,
and we're in the branch master.
And if I, let me make a very quick change
to the README file.
And you can see this little cross,
it means that the repository is dirty,
i.e. there is a local change somewhere here.
And I can see, yeah, there we go.
Git status shows me that the README has been modified,
and that's what that little cross shows me.
And if I don't have the cross,
it means that the repo is clean.
So out of the box, there's some useful functionality
in the Oh My Zsh.
We go back to the home directory.
Earlier on, if we scroll back,
I can see that it said look over this file,
so if we go ahead and just type open and that file name,
and it's gonna open that into a text editor for me.
Just bumping the font up here.
So it's mostly comments,
this obviously isn't syntax highlighted,
I could open something like Sublime.
Everything starting with a hash is a comment,
and this is the configuration for my shell.
Now, the interesting thing, or the very first thing
I'm interested in, is this.
There is also local customizations in this,
we'll come back to that later.
The Z Shell theme is robbyrussell.
We can look at all the themes over here,
so let's just stick that into a browser window,
and look at all the options we have in their glory.
So lots and lots of screenshots,
so this is the one that I personally use,
with a few modifications, but there are lots.
As you can see, as you scroll through,
we can just choose one at random.
Or maybe not at random but should we choose one?
Choose the agnoster one, that's quite a cool one,
so let's grab that.
It says shown with Solarized Dark colorscheme
and Powerline-patched Menlo 14 points,
so it talks about how to instal those fonts.
Let's not do that one 'cause you need an extra font.
Let's do, oh, we need to go Powerline.
How about avit?
There we go, just telling me to get on with it, choose one.
So let's stick that into there,
I'm just gonna hit Command + S, and that's saved.
And if I just open up another tab,
we can see slightly different configuration.
I think the background colour isn't the same,
but we would have to change that
in the iTerm preferences over here.
We just go back to the Documents and the jsonbin thing.
We can see, oh, look, (mumbles) there, so three hours,
I guess that was the last commit, maybe, git log.
Kind of three hours ago, I think so, yup.
So 3 hours 45 minutes ago was
the last commit in this repo.
Nice useful feature, as we can see, again,
we have another cross telling us that we have a dirty repo.
We have the branch that we're on and the directory,
and we have our prompt a little bit low down.
Pretty nice, what else do we have?
Colour coded stuff here.
And I wonder if we have...
Let's go back to our home directory,
and I remember we had,
in this bin, yeah, we had a programme that would execute,
so it's called ./bin/hello would print out hello world.
We see it's red, red means it's executable.
So we've got these white files,
which are just plain text, blue directories,
and red means executable.
So that's a theme, you can choose any one of the themes
and literally just drop in the name
and then hit save and reload, and you have
the theme automatically available.
You can also edit themes, I have a blog post
about how I've customised my theme,
and in the next videos, I'll show you some plugins
I find really really useful.